**Application types:**

*Compute-intensive -* challenge in parallelizing some very large computation

*Data-intensive -* when data management is one of the primary challenges in developing the application:

- storing and processing large data volumes
- manage changes to data
- ensuring consistency in face of failures and concurrency
- making sure services is highly available

<br/>

**Data warehouse vs data lake**

*Data warehouse -* OLAP database with data from business, has SQL interface

*Data lake* - centralized data repository that holds copy of any data which may be useful for analytics to perform any operations, like feature engineering using python

Systems of record and derived data

*System of record -* source of truth, e.g. event, user input, created_at

*Derived data systems -* result of taking data from system of record and processing it in some way.

<br/>

**Cloud vs Self-Hosting**

> The received management wisdom is that things that are a core competency or a competitive advantage of your organization should be done in-house, whereas things that are non-core, routine, or commonplace should be left to a vendor
> 

Cloud:
- Can scale machines fast
- Doesn’t require setup
- Lack of control - you cannot add feature
- If the service goes down - you wait
- Privacy concerns

Self-Hosting:
- Cheaper
- More control

Cloud(AWS) core services - CPU and storage are separated. EBS/S3 are differentiated from computing machines. This disaggregation introduces networking issues like overhead, latency and bandwidth.

<br/>

**Organization**

Traditionally people managing an organization's server side data infrastructure were known as *DBAs* or *system administrators*.

DevOps philosophy has guided trend of integration of roles of software developers and operations into teams with shared responsibility for both backend services and data infrastructure. Google implemented is as a *Site Reliability Engineers*.

The high-level goal of providing a reliable service remains the same, but process and tools are evolved.

DevOps/SRE philosophy places greater emphasis on:
- Automation - preferring repeatable processes over manual one-off jobs
- preferring ephemeral virtual machines and services over long running servers to think about fail-tolerance by design
- enabling frequent application updates
- learning from incidents
- preserving the organization's knowledge about the system, even as individual people come and go

<br/>

**Distributed vs single node**

*Distributed system* - a system that involves several machines communicating via a network.

Reasons to have distributed system:
- Inherited
- Requests between cloud services
- Fault tolerance
- Scalability and elasticity
- Latency
- Using specialized software
- Legal compliance
- Sustainability

Problems:
- Network: latency, overhead, limited bandwidth, failures
- Troubleshooting
- Data consistency

<br/>

**Microservices and Serverless**

[TODO]

**Questions:**
- Can we have a hybrid of cloud and self-hosting for example kubernetes with self-hosted nodes and with aws managed nodes?
- How about hybrid of multiple clouds, not only most popular?
- How cheap can be cloud? 
- How much electricity self-host can require?
- What exactly is DevOps and SRE, to which extend SaaS software developers should know this?